You have probably heard of the Voynich
Manuscript. It's a book made in 15th
century Europe, and despite a century of
our collective efforts, we still can't
read a single word of it. What I've
always found, at least as intriguing, is
that this even applies to the words we
should be able to read. On the last page
of the manuscript, folio 116v,
someone wrote these four lines in the
Latin alphabet, plain old medieval
letters.
The style can be dated to the first half
of the 15th century, the same age as the
parchment, which means there's a good
chance that these words were written by
someone directly involved in making the
manuscript. If we could understand what
this means, we might get a rare glimpse
into their lives 600 years ago.
But, we can't. Even in these four lines,
spelled out for us in our own letters,
the manuscript refuses to give us a
foothold. While researching this video,
I presented this fragment to a range of
specialized scholars, and they all agree
it's a tough nut to crack. Keep in mind
that few pieces of medieval parchment
have been scrutinized as much as this
one. So, if there was a sensible, easy,
clear-cut translation to be found, we
would have had it already.
I had originally intended this to be one
video, but soon decided to split it in
two, since there's just so much ground
to cover. In this first part, I will
explain what we do know about this
fragment, or at least the parts that
seem the most secure. And then, in part
two, I will bring in the help of some
scholars, people who have not publicly
spoken about the Voynich Manuscript
before, but who are specialized in
inscriptions like these. But first,
let's see what we're dealing with here.
In medieval manuscripts, it's often the
case that the last page is left blank.
And it's often the first place we look
when we want to find various scribbles
and annotations that aren't a part of
the work proper. So, it's not unusual at
all to find something written in an open
space like this. The parchment of this
folio is in a very bad shape, which does
not make our job any easier. We have
various types of holes, old repairs,
stains, fading. There are drawings, but
we will have to leave those aside for
another time.
All right, let's begin. You may have
noticed that the top line is separated
from the other three. It seems to
consist of three words, though spacing
overall can be tricky in this kind of
semi-connected handwriting. The first
word is one that's discussed most often,
because it's the one we can actually
work with. The writing is relatively
clear, and there's not much uncertainty
about the reading of the letters. Most
researchers read this as boxleber, of
which the leber part is the easiest to
understand. In Middle High German, and
still in modern German, this means
liver. The box part needs some more
explaining. Leber is a common ingredient
in German cookbooks, and it's often the
second part of a compound, as seems to
be the case here as well. The first part
tells us which animal the liver is from.
Pig's liver, cow's liver, hen's liver.
If it has a liver, they'll cook with it.
I'm using the genitive s, like cow's
liver, on purpose here in English to
mirror the grammatical structure we're
interested in. Okay, so what kind of
animal is a box? Well, the dominant view
is that it corresponds to the modern
German Bock, the etymological equivalent
of English buck. In German, it most
often refers to male goats, but it can
be almost any horned animal. Bock isn't
box, but we're getting there.
First of all, fluctuation between B and
P is extremely common in medieval German
dialects. For example, in this 15th
century Bavarian manuscript, one of the
ingredients is boxbluot,
buck's blood. I got this from Korema, by
the way, a wonderful collection of
medieval German cookbooks.
Interestingly, when bucks are mentioned,
it's usually the animal's liver they're
interested in. These are some of the
spelling variations I've encountered.
You may notice that one letter is
suspiciously absent, though, and that's
X. Box and bocks sound exactly the same,
but to render the gay ending and the
genitive s as a single X, that's a very
unusual spelling choice. It would be
like if in English I would write buck's
liver like this.
There are a few examples of of something
like this happening in medieval German,
but it's extremely rare. So, in summary,
buck's liver works here, but with the
one caveat that the spelling is
uncommon.
Boxleber gives us something to work
with, but the same cannot be said for
these next two words. We simply don't
know what they say, and I'm not aware of
any reading that managed to gain some
traction. They're just tricky to read,
not in the least because of the
deplorable state of the parchment. For
example, shapes like these resemble the
top of P, like in box. So, did their
descenders, that's the lower part, get
erased? You would be surprised at the
amount of different plausible readings
for these words, and none of them make a
lot of sense to us so far. Now, we will
momentarily skip the two middle lines,
and first look at the bottom.
Interestingly, we get two Voynichese
words, which obviously we can't read.
They seem to be integrated in the text,
but we can only speculate about the
reason. All I can say is that these are
normal, properly formed Voynichese words
that would not be out of place in the
text of the manuscript. So, probably
this writer knew what they were doing.
Now, remember in the top line, I
mentioned the unclear descenders of P.
Well, we have exactly the same
phenomenon here.
These words, too, are problematic.
Whichever way you read them, I'll put
some options up on the screen, but know
that none of them are particularly
useful or convincing.
After a series of six problematic words,
it's time to find our footing again, and
luckily, sonim is solid ground. Browse
any medieval German cookbook, or really
anything that involves series of
instructions, and you will come across
sonim, then take.
This usually follows after a conditional
clause. If you want to make stuff, you
first have to take your stuff.
Here's an example from a 14th century
German manuscript. Willt du einen guoten
fladen machen von kalbslebern, so nim
kalbslebern und hacke die klein, and so
on. I didn't actually know that I was
actually going to attempt to read this,
but here we are. If you want to make a
good pie from calf's liver, then take
calf's liver and chop it finely. If you
want to do this, usually if you want to
make this, then start by taking this,
then take. I picked this example out of
literally thousands, because it
illustrates three things for us. First,
it's got liver. Ingredients like our
buck's liver and the phrase sonim both
belong in the context of recipes, so it
links our top line to the bottom line.
It also shows how often we get words
ending in -en in German. Here's an
article, an adjective, a noun, and a
verb. And it just so happens that these
two mystery words before sonim also end
in -en. Again, I do not know what they
mean, but it seems to be an indication
that they fit at least in the German
language context. Finally, in most
cases, including this one, sonim is
immediately followed by an ingredient,
the first ingredient we need to take,
nim, to start cooking, which leads us
nicely to
gasmich. Usually, this is understood as
a dialectical form of geissmilch, German
for goat's milk. Are you noticing a
theme here? Bock, from the first line,
most commonly refers to the male of a
goat.
And now we have the milk of a goat. Just
like in the case of box with an X,
though, spelling is a bit unusual here.
The monophthongization of geiss to gass
could be defended on dialectical
grounds, but dropping the L from milch
is quite bizarre.
It's really unattested in medieval
sources as far as I'm aware. So, we must
assume it's a scribal omission if we
want to keep our milk.
This reading of the last line as, in
that case, take goat's milk, has been
the standard interpretation since
Professor Richard Salomon proposed it in
the 1950s,
and it still holds up.
Especially sonim is important, since it
indicates beyond any shadow of a doubt
that the writer is using a German
dialect. And together with what looks
like ingredients, it strongly points to
text genres that involve series of
instructions.
Finally, there's some kind of a large O
or a circle. Richard Salomon thought it
was short for oder, the German word for
or,
and he hypothesized that the sentence
was cut off.
I personally doubt this explanation,
since the circle is much larger than any
O in the text, and it's connected to a
row of dots.
For all we know, it's a schematic
representation of the next step, which
is to drizzle your goat's milk onto an
egg.
Now, why did I decide to skip ahead from
the first line to the last? Well, I see
linguistic and thematic connections
between these two, but the middle lines
are different.
Even without trying to read a single
word or something, you should notice
right away.
There are these crosses separating each
word or word pair.
They might seem strange or whimsical,
but to any medievalist who has studied
marginal annotations before, they should
be a familiar sight.
Words mixed with crosses like these
indicate that we're likely dealing with
a charm. Charms are a little-known but
fascinating part of medieval life, and
I'll be talking about them in the next
video, including an interview with a
scholar who wrote a book about charms.
But that's for next week. We'll first
focus on what's written here. Now, for
this next part, I'm going to give an
unscripted overview of these two middle
lines. It's just a bit easier if I can
just point right away at what I'm
talking about, so you can follow along
on my screen. Uh the first word here is
one of the most infamous words in the
whole Voynich Manuscript, I think,
because it's really emblematic of the
way we can barely understand this
inscription here. Um there's basically
two ways people read this, either as
ankhiton or mikhiton.
I prefer ankhiton, and I'll tell you
why. First, look at the letter A.
It's open at the bottom with a curve
here, a diagonal line, and then a
straight vertical line. You can see this
in several words, but also notice the
variation in the three A's in this word,
for example. So, there's some variation,
but the shape of the letter is quite
consistent. And so, this first part of
ankhiton or mikhiton would fit in with
that. And in that case, the next letter
would have to be N. People who prefer to
read this as mikhiton, so starting with
M I, assume that this stroke here is the
letter I, which is possible, and this
would be a capital M. It can't be a
regular M because in the examples we
have here of regular M or regular N, for
that matter,
uh they don't start with a curve, they
start with a straight leading serif. And
also, if it were a capital M, I would
expect it to be a bit larger, but it's
really just the same size as as the
regular letters. Uh you could say,
"Okay, what about the dots on the I
here?" When we have a clear letter I, it
is dotted, although the shape of the dot
is variable, like here it seems to be a
kind of faded line, but that's all okay
in medieval manuscripts. That that's
expected. But is this actually a dot or
just a smudge? To make that out, we can
look at the multispectral images, which
Lisa Fagin-Davis shared a while ago.
They were taken several years ago, but
only now they've become available to the
public. Basically, what they did was
make a scan of the page under various
kinds of lighting, infrared,
ultraviolet, you know, and that might
bring out faded ink. Here, you see
smudges in a different color, but we
don't get this bright pink that we'd
expect if there was a dot.
Based on the multispectrals, I'd say
inconclusive at best, but probably it's
not dotted. So, all that is why I
personally prefer to read this as A N.
Next, this is a pretty normal ch
ligature. Take a note of the descender
on H. The descender, that's the line
that goes under the baseline of the
text. As far as I'm aware, scripts in
this style always have a descender on H.
We'll need that later. This is clearly
an I based on the dots. We've also seen
that in the multispectral images. The
next part can be read as ton or con. You
know, the distinction between T and C is
really not always clear in medieval
handwriting, and you sometimes need the
context to figure out which one is
meant. Here, there's a little ascender,
so ton is probably the preferred
reading, but if someone wants to read it
as con, that's really fine.
The spaces aren't always very clear.
There are big ones and smaller ones. To
some extent, that's a consequence of
this style of writing that connects some
letters but leaves little gaps as well.
When you have a scribe that leaves
relatively large gaps, it can be
difficult to see where real spaces are,
at least again without the context, so
you can't predict which word you're
supposed to read. In the next word, the
letter shapes are pretty clear, apart
from the last one. Here, that's an
awkward H shape that isn't properly
formed like a D or a short S. So, maybe
this word is oladabad
or oladabas, but neither mean anything.
So,
if you want to split it up, then you
could kind of mold it into some
semi-Latin like olla with double L
dabas. You were giving eight pots. The
next word is also tricky because it
starts with a merciless row of five
minims. A minims are vertical strokes,
the basic building blocks of letters
such as I, M, N, U.
Usually, it's possible to guess from
context, but this is the Voynich
Manuscript, and we don't have much
context. Also, this thing here,
you you'd want to read it like an O, but
it's got legs.
We've never never really found anything
like it. Is it a mistake or some kind of
weird diacritic? It it's a mess. And
then, to top it all off, we've got
another badly formed H shape. Actually,
here probably it's meant for short S,
but it's weird and ugly. Taking all that
into account, you might want to read
this as multos, uh Latin for many, which
I I think is an okay option. No problem
here. This is T and E, so te, which,
assuming Latin, is the accusative form
of the second person singular pronoun,
meaning you or yourself. Then, moving
right away over here, it's another mess.
We start off with our T or C, and then
the last letter looks like R. In early
15th century handwriting, you'll often
see R written like a V shape. But this
thing in the middle might be a messed-up
A, but it's all mushed together, and the
A is not formed at all like the other
A's in the text. So, it might be
something else. It might just be that
they wanted to start writing this next
word, but made a mistake and scrapped
it, for all I know. Next word is cere, c
e r e, no problems, which is good for a
change. Cere sounds Latin-like. It would
be the ablative form of uh the word
cera, which means wax.
So, something like with wax or in wax.
That's something you can work with,
right?
Some people like to read these two
chunks as an attempt at one word, so you
could make something like carcer
out of it, which is again the ablative
form of the Latin word for prison,
something like in prison or in
confinement. It feels like a stretch to
me, though, given the large space and
the messed-up first part. Next word
clearly reads porta,
and then one of those ugly H shapes
again, so maybe portas, which would be
gates in Latin. And then, finally, this
one actually makes the most sense of
all. In charms, when you have a capital
N, and this is actually a capital letter
because it's so much bigger than the
supposed M in mikhiton, that stands for
the Latin nomen, and you have to
substitute it with the name of the
person you're reading or writing the
charm for. So, say for example, I want
to heal your broken leg, and then I say
my charm, and I fill in your name here
instead of this N. It's used quite a
lot, also for priests who have to
dedicate a prayer to someone, for
example. The template will have an N
there, and they can just fill in the
name of the person they're reading it
for. Usually, it's separated by dots
rather than crosses, so that's a bit
exceptional, but all in all, not a
problem at all. To recap for this first
line, we have ankhiton oladabas, maybe
oladabad, maybe multos te, then a mess,
cere portas, and the name of the person
who it is applied to. It doesn't mean
anything that we know of, but more about
that in the next video. Let's move on
now to the second line, which I think is
a continuation of the same phrase
because of the pattern of the crosses
that continues, and you can also kind of
see it in the layout of the lines and
the margins. This first letter is
confusing to some people, but I'm
certain it's a long S and not an F.
Here, you can see an F. I'll show you
that for you in the multispectral scan,
actually.
You can see this big fat crossbar here,
right?
Now, down here, you do get a a thorn
where they double the line, as is the
custom. That is what makes F and S
notoriously hard to tell apart, even in
printed texts. But this is six. Next
word is marics, m a r i x, no problem
there. This is probably morics,
but maybe this could be U.
And in that case, it would be morfix or
morwix. This is vix, v i x. But look how
weird this I is compared to, for
example, this I. Did they correct a
mistake here, or is the handwriting just
so variable? I don't know. It's it's
remarkable. But here, they seem to have
it dotted with a line, so vix it is.
This next word I have always read as
ahia with an H, but someone pointed out
to me that it's really unlikely to be H
because, uh one, you don't have the
descender. Remember before that I
pointed it out in the other word. And
two, you see an indication that it was
closed off this way with a pen kind of
scraping this leg, and then it continued
here. So, it looks like they intend to
close it like a B. So, it's probably
abia, though it's unclear and awful.
Next, we have a familiar figure, Maria,
the mother of Jesus. That's good. Uh we
don't have to think too much about that.
There's even an extra cross, which I
think just marks that this is an
important name, although we don't often
see that in charms that they put an
extra cross on top of a word. Still, I
just think it's an invocation of a holy
name, which is quite expected in the
case of Mary as the intercessor between
humans and heaven. All in all, this line
is pretty clear. We have six smadix
modix fix abia maria.
You can hear the the internal rhyme and
like rhythm, but we'll get back to that
in the second video.
In summary, for the whole inscription,
we start out with a German-sounding
line, which seems to contain an
ingredient, probably uh most likely the
liver of a male goat. Then, two words we
cannot read, but also have an overall
German flavor, I would say. Just to be
clear, when I say German, I'm referring
to the continuum of medieval dialects,
and not to any political or geographical
boundary. And the bottom line is the
same deal with zornim, which is very
clearly German, and gasmich, which I
think is still best interpreted like
Richard Salomon did all those years ago,
as a weird spelling or dialectical take
on geißmilch, uh goat milk. Then, I
would say that whatever's going on in
these two words seems to belong to the
same linguistic sphere. The -en endings
are very common in German, but we just
haven't really figured out how to deal
with these words yet. Then, for the two
middle lines, we're really looking at
something else. It's much more
Latin-like. Uh the common -en ending is
gone in favor of -os, -as, or even -ix,
which is not very German at all. And the
overall appearance of these lines really
points to charms, as Voynich researchers
have been thinking for a long time
already. Now, let's take a step back and
look at the whole folio again. Some
15th-century person, most likely one of
the makers of the manuscript, apparently
had a reason to write this on the last
page of the manuscript. That's why so
many people find this so fascinating.
You're looking here at a rare
opportunity to learn something about
these people, but the language and the
genre are inconsistent and the phrasing
incomplete. We can't understand most
words, and even when we have a decent
suspicion of what we're supposed to
read, the spelling is off.
This video may have left you with more
questions than answers, but I believe
when it comes to the Voynich manuscript,
questions are usually a better starting
point than false confidence. Now, I do
think there are avenues left to explore,
which should at least allow us to
tighten our grip on what this thing
might be. And one of those has to do
with charms.
We are almost sure that the crosses
indicated charm, but what are charms? In
which context are they usually found?
What kinds of words and phrases do we
expect around them? What might be the
reason for writing a charm in a book?
That's what we'll explore in the next
video. I hope to see you there.