On the very last page of the world's
most mysterious manuscript lurks, as is
only appropriate, one of the world's
most mysterious inscriptions, four lines
written in the Latin alphabet that to
this day remain almost as undeciphered
as fornic itself. A lot has been written
about what these words might mean, and a
lot more could certainly be said, but
not today. The focus of this talk is on
the handwriting.
Handwriting can to some extent be used
to determine where and when a text was
penned. It's ideally not the first or
only thing you rely on to date medieval
documents. But in the case of the
manuscript nobody can read, we'll take
anything we can get our hands on. So I
decided to investigate. Can we figure
out when and where the text on Folio
116V was written through a
paleographical analysis? Let's start by
defining what we're actually looking at
here. Is this a standard medieval Gothic
script? When we think of Gothic letters,
the first shapes that come to mind are
those of black letter, which probably
was the most widespread script in the
late medieval period and so often
appears in works of art. Alber de Role,
author of paleography of Gothic
manuscript books, calls this style
textualis, meaning book script. It's so
typical of the Gothic period that it's
also often just called Gothic script.
Nearly all the strokes that make up
these letters are thick and vertical,
and even curved letters like C and O are
instead written with straight strokes.
In conjunction with frequent use of
abbreviations, this horizontal
compression of textualis allowed scribes
to maximize the quantity of text fitting
on a page. In Italy, as an example of
geographic variation, variants of the
script that were slightly less angular
were often preferred as exemplified by
Manfredus Bal written in southern Italy
at the beginning of the 14th century.
The script was also used in early
printed books in the 20th century and
even today textualis has persisted in
certain niches such as newspaper titles
and hard rock music. The voyage
marchelia belong to a different family
of Gothic scripts kiva. These scripts
began to be used in books in the 13th
century and as the name suggests are
based on informal cursive scripts like
the Italian mercantesca. They allowed
for faster writing by limiting the need
to lift the quill from the page. Paper
as a cheaper alternative to parchment
probably also played a role in the
success of Corsa since the compression
provided by textualis became less
relevant. Cora uses single story A as
loops on the ascenders of B, H, K, and
L, and often D and adds a pointy
descender at the bottom of long S and F.
It's easy to see how these features
originated from fast and continuous
writing. The script was functional for
the everinccreasing production of
manuscripts in the 14th and 15th
centuries. But it also had an aesthetic
appeal and there are many high-end
manuscripts where the same character
shapes are written carefully and
formally with great calligraphic effects
in its various forms. Cora was extremely
popular all over Europe in particular
for the most informal manuscripts. That
brings us back to the void marginelia
and its main features. The marginelia
script clearly falls in the broad
category of Giva which is perfectly
consistent with what we know about the
voinage manuscript. But isn't there
anything more that we can extract from
it? Two years ago in June of 2023, I was
talking to Marco Ponzi about this and we
came up with a plan. In this video, I
will first explain the method we ended
up using. Then we'll look at the
results. Where did we find the best
matches and finally what are the
implications for voinage studies? We
focused entirely on this one folio.
There are others, but we did not want to
have to deal with the question of are
they written by the same person? Were
they written at the same time? So we
just wanted to eliminate variables and
just look at the very last page of the
manuscript and we noted the properties
for each letter we could confidently
identify. We then use these to score a
wide range of medieval text samples. The
scoring works as follows. In a
spreadsheet we assign one when a
property matches, zero when it doesn't.
For variable or borderline cases we may
also assign half a point. The results
were then recalculated to one point per
letter and we took the average of these
numbers. The higher this balanced
average, the better the match. As you
may expect, assigning a score to
hundreds of samples of medieval
handwritten texts involves a subjective
component. Even though this is
understood to be part of the
paleographical process, we still try to
limit this in several ways. First, by
asking yes or no questions about
observable features. This also
eliminates factors external to the
handwriting that might influence our
perception like the condition of the
vellum, the lighting of the scans or the
color of the ink. Next, I approached
this project without any preconceived
expectations.
Based on the opinions of people who knew
more about medieval handwriting than
myself, I knew the possibility of a
later inscription had to be taken into
account. So, as far as I was concerned,
this could have been written by someone
coming from anywhere in Europe at any
time in the 15th century. Finally, when
Marco and I found an exceptionally
high-scoring sample, we had the results
double checked by the other person just
in case a mistake was made and we
discussed any uncertain points. So,
which characteristics define the script
of Folio 116V?
What we're going to do now is two things
at the same time. Uh I'm going to show
you all the properties that according to
our understanding and our research are
typical for the voyage marginelia script
and I'm also going to show in practice
how this works. So we're going to
analyze a sample together. I will
randomly select one from monasterium.net
a charter from Austria and we'll see how
it compares. I have no idea if it will
be a good one or a bad one. So let's
have a look at that together. This would
be entry number 383.
Uh these are sorted from best to worst.
So here you just see the very worst
samples we collected. There's no
spoilers in there. I'll just fill in the
data here. Okay. And now we can get
started with our glyphs. So let's start
with the letter A. For A, we track three
properties. First it has to be a single
story. A. It has to be open at the
bottom. So this there has to be a gap
here and it may it may be a wide gap and
the angle here at the top is pretty
sharp. So let's see how our sample
compares. So we look for an A. Um here's
one for example. Here's one. Here's one.
So you can see in these three examples
that they are not good at all. Of course
they're of the right type. So they are
the single story A, but everything else
is not good. There's no gap at all at
the bottom. And um this isn't pointy at
all. It's it's quite it's it's a nice
and round A. So I would rate this A1
here. 0 0. So for the letter B2, we
start with a broad categorization. It
has to be looped. Uh second, the loop is
often angular. Finally, this bottom left
vertical stroke connects upwards to the
loop without curving in too much. Let's
see how our sample compares.
Okay, so we got one here, one here,
one here. We got three in a row here. Uh
here, this one has a pretty big loop.
Kind of pointy, but not as dramatically
pointy as in the voage. So maybe that's
half a point there. What is very clearly
a big difference is that this line here,
it really curves back onto this vertical
stroke, which you see very often with
bees, but the voage does something
completely different. So going to our
ratings, that's one for a looped B. I'll
give this a half for the pointy loop.
And this is definitely a zero. We did
not separately compare the shape of C
because in the voinage marginelia and
similar scripts it's often hard to tell
it apart from T. For example, in this
word both the readings set and ter are
often taken into account. We do however
have a few instances of a clear ch. As
you can see here in our spreadsheet, the
ch is not always found. Uh that's
because in Latin it generally does not
occur unless you're lucky with a
biblical name or some other kind of loan
word. It's very easy to find it in
German and some other vernacular
languages though. So we notice two
important properties here. One is that
the C in the ch ligature is very curved
in the forage text. And we note a clear
gap between the C and the H. You should
be able to quickly find the CH here.
There's one right here in the beginning.
The C is curved. It's not just a little
line that goes straight down. I would
call this curved enough, but it touches
the H. And we want the clear gap here.
We'll find another one for confirmation.
There's one on the same line right here.
So again, the C is curved. That's nice.
But it touches the H. We don't want
that. That's very simple. one for curved
and a zero for touching. In the three
letters we've seen so far, there's
something that's quite characteristic of
the way this person writes, and I would
call that a certain openness. For
example, the A has an opening right
here. It's not closed. The bottom curve
of the B doesn't close itself. It it
remains open and only touches at the
top. And the C doesn't touch the H. It
again leaves an opening. We'll see more
of that later. When there's a more open
and a more closed form, the voncribe
tends to pick the open variety. Moving
on, we get to what I consider the
trickiest part of the marginelia. Two
forms of the letter D are relevant to
us. The first is seen in this sample
from around the year 1200.
It's somewhat similar to modern cursive.
However, in many 15th century medieval
hands, the top line curves down to close
the loop, resulting in something that
looks like the number eight with a flat
right side. We can actually show this in
the sample here. Oh, here's one for
example. So, this is the word does. And
this is very interesting to us because
it has D and also a short S. Short S is
the form of S used at the end of words
in contrast to long S right here. But
we'll get to long S later. So D and
short S are both kind of H shaped. So
this D, you can see the ascender loops
back down to the middle. And so you get
almost an eight, but it's flat on this
side. Short S is almost the mirror image
of that. It's often smaller than D, but
not always. And it tends to have like
the flatter side here on the left, while
D it's on the right. Of course, these
letters are formed completely
differently. But I'm just kind of
telling you like, okay, this is how you
can think of them as uh being kind of
similar but also different. When D and
short S are wellformed, you can easily
tell them apart. But in the void
marginalia,
whatever shapes we have going on here
are not wellformed. People read them as
S or D depending on their preferred
interpretation of the words. I tried
comparing them to similar script
samples, but to no avail. As a last
resort, I asked professional
paleographer Lisa Fagen Davis's opinion,
and she confirmed my suspicion. It's a
mess. So, in order to avoid
contaminating our data with speculation,
we decided to ignore them. We do,
however, have this really clear and
elegant example of an openlooped D. So
when a manuscript has this, whether it
uses exclusively this form or not, it
gets a point. So in the sample we're
looking at here, it's it's pretty
obvious to me that they like a good loop
on their D's. I don't really see any
loopless D at first glance. So that's a
zero. The next comparable letter is G,
which we define by two properties.
First, the top is rounded. In many other
sources, the top of G is the same
horizontal line that forms the
connection to the next letter, often
with one or two horns, and we don't want
any of those. For the second feature, we
focus on the descender, specifically
this horizontal part. In some scripts,
this line loops all the way back up,
sometimes even closing the loop. In the
voinage, the line is straight and quite
the opposite of closed. So, let's look
at our sample. I have not seen a G yet.
Let's see. Oh, here's one.
So, this is clear immediately. The line
is also the line on top is also the
connecting line. There's nothing round
here. And also, you see the descender.
This part is nice, but then we're really
looking at this part. It loops back up
and it touches the top of the G. We
don't want that. So this is two zeros
for G. Moving on to H. We're looking at
four properties. First, again, the
general category. It's looped. And
second, there's a clear descender on the
right leg. These properties are usually
easy to find. It's a third one that
really makes a difference, though. We're
looking for an H of which the left leg
is straight, has no foot, and does not
connect to the right leg. Finally, if
the document has anywhere any descend on
H that's a bit more ornamental that
loops back to the right, then that's
another point. So, in our sample that's
really not been very good so far, we see
a looped H.
And this uh left line has no foot and
there's no connection here to the to the
other line. So, that's great.
There's a descender.
Now let's see if we can find any
descender where there's an extra like
ornamental curve back here. So for
example here on top is this is more than
just the descender. It it does there's
this double curve going on. So H is
looped. It has the descender. Uh the
left leg does not connect to the right
leg in the bottom. And we found a nice
curve on a descender. For L, we track
five properties, which is the most of
any letter. It's looped. The loop is
often pointy. The leg is vertical with
little to no curve. The foot is tiny or
absent, and it does not connect to the
next letter. And finally, the loop can
be very large. In our sample, we have an
L here. Now, here are two L's in a row.
They're clearly looped. The loop is kind
of pointy. The leg is rather curved.
There's a foot. The foot connects to the
next letter. The size of the loop can be
quite large. So here it connects way
past 2/3 of the stem. So that's a point
there. Next in our spreadsheet, we have
the letter P here. Uh I always like
looking for that one because it also
makes the difference between decent and
really good matches. It definitely
suffers from the marginalia openness
again because it's always open at the
top and and this gap can be pretty big
again and that's the only property we
track but it's so typical for this
script that it's worth including. So in
our sample oh I see two P's here. The
letter P can be hard to find. So I'm
lucky here. Oh, there's also two here.
We see that they're clearly closed on
top. So that's a zero.
Our next letter is R, which is also a
fun one because it's got all kinds of
interesting things going on. First of
all, we want to look at the overall
shape. Basically, if you look at the R
in the fence marginelia, it's the shape
of a V, right? So we want that. We want
a V shape. We want it without a foot. Of
very often you'll see that they have
this horizontal foot at the bottom. We
don't want that. And also R has two
common forms. And the second one isn't
always used. It's basically a
calligraphic form that's dependent on
position. It usually follows a rounded
letters like O for example. You can
easily spot it by looking for an O R
sequence. If the letter R after the O
looks different, then your scribe is
using R rotunda as it's called and the
voinish marginal scribe does not do
that. So the first point if it's just
general V-shaped R without a foot and
the sample does not use ROunda. The
second point if the V is wide and open
connected at the bottom. Looking back at
our manuscript here,
we see an R here, for example, after a.
It's a Vshape, but it has a foot and it
connects pretty high. So, that already
is enough to lose both points because
it's really just the wrong shape. Here,
there's another one after an A, and it's
almost shaped like an X. Now, to find
one, oh, here's one after an O. So this
is for you see it almost looks like fox
but that's actually an an R with a foot.
It's not R return though. So they do use
the same shape of R in all context.
Here's another one. Another one. But
it's so different from the open Vshaped
voinage R that it's two times zero
points for this one.
Okay. And then uh we still have to look
at X. Of course, X can be hard to find
in German manuscripts unless you're
lucky enough to find Roman numerals, for
example. We have two properties here.
First, the bottom left extends
diagonally straight further than the top
left. Second, there's a loop on the
right side. This might be the only case
actually where the closed option is used
instead of the open option because they
close the loop rather than just leaving
it open. Now, we know how to find an X
in a charter like this. I usually just
go to the bottom to try and see if
there's a a date.
Um, you might think that here that
there's an X here, but this is actually
un it's kind of a V shape. Oh, you can
see here, for example, they do the same.
I'm afraid if there's no X yet here that
there won't be one in the manuscript.
I'm just scanning this bottom line here.
But no, I don't think we'll find an X
here. Now, this manuscript doesn't score
high at all. I just knew from the
beginning that it would be a very bad
match. So, I'm not even going to scour
it all in the hopes of finding a single
X at this point. That's just a waste of
time. And besides, our calculations make
it so that the lack of X here doesn't
really uh make any difference. So what I
do is I just copy paste this yellow bar
in here and then we it's marked here
that there is no X. Uh next there is the
dreaded long S often confused with F by
man and machine alike. The first feature
is simple. The top doesn't curve down
too much. The second feature has to do
with the thickness of the lines. Usually
the line of the vertical stem will be
doubled and thicker. But in the voinage
we see that actually the horizontal line
is thicker. In practice though we saw
that it was really hard to work with
this property. So we just decided to
take it out of the calculations. Column
is still there. You can fill it in if
you like but it won't have an effect on
the final result.
So finally the letter N is at the end of
our list. You'll notice that this isn't
really alphabetical. That's because we
added to the spreadsheet as we went
along and noticed interesting features
that we might also track. For N, we look
at two properties which both have to do
with the descender. Uh sometimes scribes
will allow this final stroke of a word
final N. So when it's at the end of a
word, the last stroke uh to go below the
line almost like a decorative word end
marker. In our voyage marginelia, the
rule appears to be that this is not
done. So n even when it's at the end of
the word or m for that matter does not
get this descender. However, in this one
word at the bottom line, there's a very
clear counter example. It's it's quite
elegant slightly curving back at the
bottom similar to what often happens
with the descender of h. So we decided
to reward both. If the general rule in a
sample is that word final n gets no
descender, that's a point. And if
there's any curved descender in there,
that's another point. Often you'll find
these more elaborate curved descenders
at the bottom line where there's a bit
more space. So, it's always worthwhile
to have a look there if you're looking
for one. Remember for long S, which we
haven't filled in yet, we were looking
for this part, this horizontal line that
does not curve down. It in voinage is
kind of straight. It might curve down
slightly, but it does not do this. Also,
here you can see how how comparatively
thick this vertical line is in the
voage. It's very thin. But remember, we
don't actually use that in our
calculations. But here it's a clear
counter example of this very thick
doubled vertical line of long s. This is
a definite zero points. Uh then looking
at n uh n and m you can compare them.
They're quite similar in this regard. So
here we say uh here we have an n at the
end of the word. It does not get a
descender. This m does not get a
descender. Here's an n without a
descender. So that's a point. The
general rule appears to be that N does
not get a descender, but I see here on
the same line that they did add one here
and it's a very nice one with this curve
going back here. So, it earns both
points here when it comes to uh the
descenders on the end. That's two zeros
for S and two ones for N. Here at the
end are some things we once tracked but
are no longer necessary for the
calculations because for various reasons
we decided that it just did not work. So
you can just ignore these or you can
fill them in if you like. But I'm not
going to talk about these anymore in the
video. So now let's see what this does
for our calculations
here. We just make this longer. It's
okay. So it gets uh 0.40 40 which is
really really bad. It's white colored
which means um this scale goes from
green to white to red. So it means
somewhere in the middle. In the end,
Marco and I tracked 33 properties of
which 28 were used to count towards the
final result. We did so for 382 samples,
which means we filled in over 12,000
values, each based on careful analysis
of medieval handwriting. Add to that the
work and time it takes to go through
online archives trying to obtain a wide
geographical and chronological spread of
samples and finding and filling in all
the relevant data like shelf mark, date,
and place of origin. It's needless to
say that this has been the most labor
intensive forance project I've ever been
involved in. But we learned a lot about
both time and place. Let's start with
place. Earlier I said I had no
expectations about the location where
this scribe was active. If the
marginelia may have been written by a
later owner, then this person could have
come from anywhere and they wouldn't
necessarily have had anything to do with
the creation of the manuscript. However,
if we do hypothesize a connection to the
writer's location and that of the
manuscript's production, we can make
some predictions. The infamous
swallowtail Merlin on the Rosett's
foldout lead us to Italy. Extent
examples of swallowtail buildings that
already existed in the early 15th
century are not found above the southern
alpine passes. However, we are quite
certain that some of the words we can
read in this text are in German. So
people have usually been looking at the
intersection between these two factors.
The more you go to the south, the more
familiar people would have been with
swallowtail architecture. The more we go
to the north, the more German speakers
there are. With that in mind, here's
what we learned about the places where
people wrote like this. I'll quickly
list first where we did not find any
good matches and then highlight three
more fruitful areas. Basically, any area
dominated by a Romans language yields
poor results, at least in our
experience. Think of France and its
sphere of influence like the Low
Countries and Alsas, the Iberian
Peninsula, but also Italy somewhat to my
surprise. Less surprising is a lack of
good hits in the British Isles, which
are insular by definition. We also did
not find much anywhere east of Germany
and even in Austria. Our success was
very limited. This is kind of what the
first stage of our investigation looks
like. After digging through many
different archives from different
countries, we hadn't really stumbled
onto anything of significance yet. It
was during one of those excursions into
remote lands that I stumbled upon our
first success. For a period during our
research, the best matches for the
Margelia script known to us and as far
as I'm aware to anyone at that time were
from, I kid you not, Scandinavia.
Sometimes they were even written in
German because these places were
effectively the northern reaches of the
Haniatic League, the northern European
trading network connecting the areas
shown on this map. Note that we did not
find good results in the rest of the
league, only in these northern
extremities. In our current ranking of
almost 400 samples, we find documents
from Sweden on the 8th, 9th, 13th, and
14th place. Estonia's capital, then
known as Reval, on the 11th place.
Denmark on the 16th place. We now
consider this a coincidence, but it's
interesting nonetheless. I can guarantee
that if you spend an hour going through
medieval charters in the Swedish
National Archives and then another hour
doing the same anywhere in Italy, we
will find far better handwriting matches
for the marginalia in Sweden. For a
while at least, it looked like I would
need to explain to you today why we now
believe the Margelia were written by a
Scandinavian immigrant, which is
possible by the way. People in the
Middle Ages were able to move around by
land and by sea. Our story doesn't stop
there, though. Granted, there are
Scandinavian examples in the top 2% of
our results, which nobody saw coming,
but eventually we found a handful of
better samples. Since I don't expect
everyone to know the location of every
German town, I will add them to the map
as we go along. You might notice a
certain clustering here in our top 10.
Some of these top samples were found by
Marco, others by me. So we kind of
independently converged on this
particular area. The first and second
places are both from a city called Fula
in the German state of Hessen. Number
three is from Gross Umstad. We'll skip
number four for a moment. We'll get back
to that later. The fifth place is from a
charter from Gowungan.
Six one from Betoshim.
Seven from somewhere around mines. Eight
and nine are from Sweden. as I mentioned
before and 10 is from Hessen without any
mention of a specific city. This means
that our entire top three and seven out
of our top 10 entries are all from two
neighboring German states, Hessen and
Rhineland FS around the cities of Fula
and Mines. Interestingly, when we
overlay these locations with a map of
West Central German dialects, we see
that they are, at least today,
linguistically very closely related. I
do not know at all whether this has any
influence on handwriting, though, but I
thought I'd point it out nonetheless.
Now, about that number four we skipped.
For over a year, I thought that this
would be the story I'd be telling you
today. After a brief sightseeing tour in
Scandinavia, Marco and I ended up in a
still more northern than expected German
state that hadn't really been on
anyone's radar that I know of.
But as it turns out, we were suffering
from a certain deficiency,
a magnesium deficiency.
Mere weeks before this video was set to
go live, a Voyage Ninja member by the
name of magnesium posted this to the
forum. a Swiss manuscript that he called
an extremely good reference for the
Marchelia. Everybody agreed that this
was an exceptional find and I don't
remember any Marchinelia parallel
causing such a stir before. Even Lisa
Fagen Davis was there. When Marco and I
rated this sample, it ended up on the
fourth place which is basically at the
top because the difference there are
pretty small. So that's an entry to add
to our map in the area of Zurich. Not
quite in a swallowtail Merlin territory,
but closer to where people expect the
action to be with a complete top 10 on
the map. Now we get two results in
Sweden, seven around Fula and Mines, and
one around Zurich. I'll also show you
the rest of the top 20, but keep in mind
that scores have dropped pretty quickly
at this point. We get some further
padding of the Scandinavian and central
German regions, as well as one other
location in Switzerland. one in northern
Austria and one near Nuremberg.
Where the story of the writer's
geographical origin is complex, that of
his most likely time frame is very
simple. Let me show you. So the
radiocarbon dating has shown that a
parchment of the vo manuscript was most
likely prepared in this period. Then the
question is are the marginelia written
by one of the original scribes as the
presence of a nymph and voiced cheese
might suggest or are they the result of
a later intervention? Well, here are the
dates of our top 10 results.
Top 20.
You know what? I'll put the entire top
50 on here. It became clear to us pretty
soon that this particular style of
Coriva is, for lack of a better term,
medieval.
It's not that we didn't look at later
documents. In fact, we included 140
samples dated to the second half of the
15th century or later, but they just
tend to be awful matches.
Someone writing like this was most
likely to be active before or during the
period marked by the radiocarbon dating.
So what does this all mean for our
understanding of the Voinage manuscript?
First of all, it's clear that from our
manuscript's frame of reference, this is
an early script. Taking into account the
presence of Voyage cheese, a drawing of
a nymph, and the chronological data we
discussed here, the evidence now
strongly weighs in favor of the
marginelia being contemporaneous with
the writing of the manuscript itself.
related to this and more importantly we
now have further evidence that the
manuscript's main voyage cheese text and
at least the pen work for the drawings
was done soon after the vellum was
acquired. Some people believe the
manuscript was written on old parchment
making its contents more recent than its
material. But this position has now
become even more untenable. When we
started this project we had never hoped
to be able to hone in on specific
locations. Writing was an international
business with traveling scribes,
interconnected courts, trade relations,
and so on. This becomes evident from all
the decent matches we found in a place
like Scandinavia.
However, regional variation does exist
since it proved nearly impossible to
find any good parallels in northern
Germany, regions to the east of Germany,
France, Spain, England, and even Italy.
One top match was found in a manuscript
from Zurich, but the majority of most
similar samples come from around the
central German cities minds and fula.
It's important to stress that we are not
claiming that the voage manuscript was
made in Fula. But based on the evidence
we have available at the moment, it
looks like one of the manuscript scribes
may have been trained in this area. As
the magnesium enrichment event shows
though, we unfortunately weren't able to
analyze all the millions of digitized
documents out there, and I definitely
don't consider this research finished.
What we provide most of all is a
structured system for this one specific
purpose. Any good-looking handwriting
sample you come across can be added, and
you'll immediately see how it compares
to anything else we've collectively
accumulated. If you think Marco and I
neglected your favorite medieval
country, then this is your time to
shine. We'll make a copy of our
spreadsheet available so you can assess
samples yourself and add to our
collective knowledge of the script. It
would be particularly interesting to see
if the area around Churik or anything
closer to the Alps can be reinforced. As
things stand now though, it looks like
at least one of the void scribes came
from central Germany and they wrote this
text in the early 15th century.
To close things off, I really have to
thank Marco Ponzi for the countless
hours he dedicated to this research and
his contributions to this video. And of
course, all the people at Foage Ninja
who helped with finding samples and
resources.